Axiom: There exists at least one way of ascribing coordinates and time moments, such that the equations of motion take on the form [[Force Newtonian Dynamics]].

Any particular choice of coordinates and time moments is called reference frame. Any reference frame in which [[Force Newtonian Dynamics]] is held true is called an intertial reference frame. 

The above axiom the theory follows that: the axiom guarantees the existence of one inertial reference frame. Galilean relativity then provides a continuum of other inertial reference frames, the choice of a particular one just being a matter of convenience.

In a slightly different formulation, we can promote Galilean relativity to the status of general postulate by requiring that all the laws of Nature be the same in any inertial reference frame obtained from a given one by the transformation. In such a formulation, a derivation of [[Homework/Classical Mechanics/Homework 1/Problem 1]] frim the postulates of Newtonian mechanics has the meaning of consistency theorem stating that the postulates of Newtonian Mechanics are consistent with the Galilean relativity principle. 

Finally we observe that [[Force Newtonian Dynamics]] suggests a natural way of choosing an inertial reference frame. Indeed frin this equation it follows that a particle which does not interact with the rest of the particles moves with a constant velocity in any inertial reference frame. Hence, an inertial reference frame can be associated with (formed by) a set of particles that do not interact with each other and the rest of the World, and do not move with respect to each other. We also need a clock. The role of the clock can be played by two particles bound to each other by an attractive Coulomb potential; the natural time unit corresponds to the period of the orbital motion of the two particles. This completes our construction of consistent Newtonian picture with the world. 