In classical mechanics the statistical description and the full dynamical description naturally deal with distinctively different mathematical objects. The dynamical description - the canonical formalism - operates with canonical dynamical variables (i.e. [[Generalized Coordinates]] and momenta), while the statistical description is all about the distribution functions for the canonical variables. In Quantum Mechanics - thanks to its probabilistic nature and linearity  - the statistical description operates with the very same object, the [[Density Matrix]] - often referred to, in this context as [[Statistical Operator]]. The only difference is that in the dynamic theory one normally addresses the density matrix of the full system, while quantum statistics is naturally constructed in terms of the [[Reduced Density Matrices]]. In the quantum statistical context the reduced density matrix $\hat \rho^{(I)}$ describes either a smaller subsystem of a macroscopic system, or a system weakly coupled to a [[Heat Bath]]. In the case of equilibrium statistics considered below, both cases are essentially equivalent, since a smaller subsystem of a macroscopic system can be viewed as a part of a bigger subsystem, the latter being weakly coupled to a heat bath effectively replacing the rest of the macroscopic system. For example, in the case of ideal Bose or Fermi gases these subsystems are nothing but single-particle eigenmodes.

Our goal is to establish the form of the density matrix of a system in equilibrium with a heat bath. First, let us elaborate on what do we mean by heat bath. Think of a macroscopic number of subsystems of arbitrary nature weakly coupled to each other, our subsystem of interest being one of them. The condition of infinitesimal weakness of coupling is crucial for the subsystems to preserve their individuality. In quantum-mechanical language, this means that the entanglement between any two subsystems is negligibly small, so that the density matrix $\hat \rho_{\mathcal A \mathcal B}$ of any two subsystems $\mathcal A$ and $\mathcal B$viewed as a composite system $\mathcal{AB}$ splits into a direct product of individual density matrices:

$$\begin{gather} \forall \mathcal{A, B}: & \hat \rho_{\mathcal A \mathcal B} = \hat \rho_{\mathcal A}\hat \rho_{\mathcal B}  \end{gather}$$

That is, we say that there are essentially no correlations between any two subsystems, because each of them is simultaneously coupled  