# Non-technical Notes
Because of the [[Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle]], statements about the [[Position]] and momentum ([[Table of Contents/Momentum]]) will have some numerical value. The uncertainty principle also says that eliminating uncertainty about position maximizes uncertainty about position. A probability distribution assigns probabilities to all possible values of position and momentum. The [[Schrodinger Equation]] gives [[Wave function]] solutions, the squares of which are probabilities of where the electron might be, just as Heisenberg's probability distribution does.

In the everyday world it is natural and intuitive to think of every object being in its own eigenstate. This is another way of saying that every object appears to have a definite position, a definite momentum, a definite measured value, and a definite time of occurence. However, the uncertainty principle says that it is impossible to measure the exact value for the momentum of a particle like an electron, given that its position has been determined at a given instant. Likewise it is impossible to determine the exact location of that particle once its momentum has been measured at a particular instant.

Therefore it became necessary to formulate clearly the difference between the state of something that is uncertain in the way just described such as an electron in a probability cloud and the state of something having a definite value. When an object can definitely be "pinned down"  in some respect it is said to possess an eigenstate. As stated above when the wave function collapses because the position of an electron has been determined, the electron's state becomes an eigenstate of position, meaning that its position has a known value, an eigenvalue of the eigenstate of position. 